---
layout: default
---

I'm Wendy Liu, and I'm currently a student in the sociology department of the
London School of Economics, completing a [one-year masters program on
inequality][personal statement]. I'm also a software developer: I interned at
Google in 2013 and was all set for a software career in the Bay Area, but then
I got roped into co-founding a [data science startup][Macromeasures] after
graduating from McGill University in 2014. It was an exhilarating and edifying
experience, the primary consequence of which was me realising that the
technology industry can be incredibly myopic and thus falls way short of its
potential for actually making the world a better place. Hence the switch to
studying inequality.

In case you're wondering about the username: I have no affiliation with Dell
Inc; "dellsystem" is a just a throwaway username I chose when I was 12, but the
username kind of stuck with me. I have since come to terms with "dellsystem"
and will even answer to "dell".

This website is primarily a place to showcase my [art](/art), my [code](/code),
and my [words](/words). I also maintain [a list of the complete works of David
Foster Wallace](/dfw). If you want to get in touch, find me on Twitter
[@dellsystem](https://twitter.com/dellsystem), or check out my [about
page](/about#contact) for other contact options. You should also add me on
[Goodreads]â€”I'm in the midst of a 208-book reading challenge this year, so
you'll get to watch me struggle with that in real time.

[Macromeasures]: http://macromeasures.com
[personal statement]: /posts/a-personal-statement
[Goodreads]: http://goodreads.com/dellsystem
