---
layout: post
title: "A change of pace"
categories:
- meta
---

When I first created this blog -- almost six years ago, somehow -- I planned to
fill it with technical posts about projects I was working on and tips I'd
discovered. It only recently occurred to me that I, despite being a programmer
by occupation, could use my blog to write about things other than programming.
Which is silly, because it's not as if I had been born with a fully-formed
.vimrc file and an inability to form opinions on things that don't involve
code.

So let me remedy that.

***

I was born in China, and spent most of my childhood in Canada, but I'd always
wanted to move to the U.S. I'm still not entirely sure why. I do know that the
U.S. has always felt like the center of the world from where I was, and that I
had a naive admiration for what I thought of as American ideals. I'll even
confess to a belief in American exceptionalism despite having no real link to
the U.S. Even after gaining a more nuanced and critical understanding of
American history with the help of writers like Howard Zinn, even after I moved
back to China and found myself halfway across the world from U.S. soil, I still
identified more with the U.S. than I did with any other country. I followed
American politics with such zeal that I was probably more informed than most
actual Americans. Culturally, and politically, I was American; the fact that I
wasn't one _de jure_ was just a small obstacle to overcome.

Like many others in my generation, the first election season I remember
following was 2008, when a young Senator from Chicago threatened to upset
the political order by becoming America's first black president. Imagine that!
In a country whose legacy was stained -- from the very beginning -- with the
blood of black slavery, in a country that had ended segregation only a
generation before mine, there he was: a symbol of progress made, and of
progress to come. Even now, knowing that Obama's immediate legacy will forever
be associated with the rise of Donald Trump, I still get chills when I watch
his 2008 inauguration speech. If there's any validity to the idea of American
exceptionalism, the election of someone like Barack Obama might be its most
powerful testament.

It may have been naive, but I believed in the America whose strength came from
the enduring power of its ideals: "democracy, liberty, opportunity and
unyielding hope". And so when his term limit came around and there was the
chance that his successor would be a _woman_, one who was admittedly flawed but
still progressive and certainly better than the alternative, I was thrilled.
Not just for pragmatic reasons, although she clearly would have done a better
job of protecting women's rights and making life easier for immigrants like me.
But because it fit the narrative of the America I knew and loved, the America
that was slowly but steadily becoming more equal and just.

Now I understand that this America only ever existed in my head.

***

Over the last few days, I feel like I've lost so much time to the endless loop
that is my Twitter feed, knowing that each scroll will only bring fresh horrors
to deepen my misery but still unable to look away. If there's any consolation
to be found amidst the suffering, it's that it has ignited the capacity for
resistance in millions. That so many have been able to break through the
despair and start mobilising, fighting for the world they want rather than
accepting the one they have, gives me hope.

So maybe the America I fell in love with isn't that far off. It might not come
easily, but I suspect that the next few years will see an outpouring of
grassroots resistance. Stuck between a party that wants to roll back civil
rights and one that has a reputation for being ineffectual and even corrupt,
those who heard Obama's promise of change in 2008 and are still wanting have an
chance to build something new. It won't be perfect, but what is? Better
incremental progress than a step backward. Better to light a candle than to
enable fascism in the dark.

Even if I no longer believe I will be part of it -- for immigration-related
reasons that will be the subject of another post -- America's inevitable
rebirth will be nothing short of spectacular, and I will feel so privileged
just to be able to witness it from afar.

***

For better or worse, this blog is the best embodiment of my digital self.
Certainly better than Twitter, because there's only so much you can communicate
about yourself in 140 characters. If I look back on what I've written over the
last few years, I don't see much to be proud of: some obscure technical tips;
descriptions of silly vanity projects I've worked on; a data-driven foray into
electoral politics in which I tried very hard to erase all traces of being a
human being with opinions. Lots of self-deprecating asides. Using irony as a
shield against the fact that I was not writing about anything worth being
earnest about.

I never actually planned to go into software development. Throughout high
school, programming was a hobby I picked up because I liked the idea of having
something to work on in my free time. I never really thought of myself as
particularly good at it, though. Certainly not good enough to pursue it
full-time. When I applied to colleges -- and boy, do I regret spending so much
time applying to colleges; I lost an entire winter break answering a
seemingly neverending array of essay prompts -- I did so as a Physics major for
every school except McGill, which had a Physics and Computer Science major that
seemed reasonably interesting. The Computer Science part was the product of
convenience, more of an afterthought than anything else.

The thing that I liked most of all was _writing_. An early love of reading gave
way to an infatuation with words -- the way they sounded, the way they tasted,
the way you could arrange them in _just the right way_ to make the reader see
the world as you do, if only for a brief, tantalising moment.

But even teenaged me, I-only-know-PHP me, I'm-going-to-major-in-physics me
would soon see the way the wind was blowing. Software developers were the
future, not writers. The hard drives of laptops past are littered with stories,
poems, essays, plays. Whole worlds that I had created. Abandoned to time and
the pre-Dropbox digital ether.

Sometimes I miss it, you know?

There are some things about my adolescence that I regret. Hero-worshipping
people like Paul Graham and Eric S. Raymond. Revering The Fountainhead to a level
surpassed only by the likes of Paul Ryan, which, as far as I can tell, is a
[quasi-universal experience][aynrand]. Skipping school so I could stay home and
play RuneScape (and I didn't even max out any stats). But the time I spent
writing isn't one of them. If anything, I wish I had spent more time reading,
and writing, and seeking feedback on my work so that I could be better today.

I'm not quitting the tech industry just yet, but I no longer believe that my
greatest contributions to the world will be limited to writing or discussing
software. Especially given everything else that's been happening recently. And
I don't just mean in the White House, either. People all over the world --
myself included -- are realising that a global order based on neoliberalism
might not result in the stable and just world we'd been promised; the question,
now, is what to replace it with, and how. Writing about something I learned
while using MongoDB seems very small and insignificant in comparison.

***

So here are some things I plan to write about over the next few months.

One major theme I want to explore is the idea of understanding complicated
concepts by breaking them down and approaching them from first principles.
You'll almost always end up with a deeper understanding of the original concept
that way. This is something I learned from physics, but you can apply this to a
variety of subjects: computer science concepts like regular expressions;
mathematical logic; social and economic concepts like capitalism, universal
basic income, and pensions. What I'm talking about is a bit like how Paul
Lockhart wishes math would be taught in [A Mathematician's Lament][lament], and
a bit like [the "click"][dfw] that David Foster Wallace mentions to describe
his mathematical epiphanies. You don't _need_ to learn automata theory to be
able to use regular expressions, for instance, but if you do, you'll have such
a much more fundamental understanding that can come in handy sometimes.

So many people walk around with very shallow understandings of important ideas
because they were taught to memorise their definitions, not to critique or
unpack or even think about for more than a second. Which is tragic, because
the result is often a set of erroneous conclusions. My plan is to write up as
many of these from-first-principles posts as I can. With any luck, I'll gain a
better understanding of the topic myself in the process.

Some other planned topics:

* American's immigration system and how it impedes would-be immigrants in
  myriad ways.
* How people resolve contradiction and ambiguity when forming their
  worldview. My favourite illustration of this -- and the inspiration for this
  post -- comes from Neal Stephenson's The Diamond Age, which I have rated five
  stars on Goodreads solely because of the inclusion of this theme.
* Reviews of various literary works (books, songs), as well as some meta-posts
  about the value of literary criticism as a whole.
* Certain not-so-flattering takes on the technology industry.
* Maybe some tech-related posts once in a while, just so that the time I spent
  deliberating on a syntax highlighting theme for this blog doesn't go to waste.

Now, I'll acknowledge that my blog isn't exactly a hotbed of activity. You may
be wondering ("you" being hypothetical here, as it's not clear that anyone will
ever read this post) why I would bother writing this post, much less any
of the other posts described above. I'm not an expert on any of the things I
want to write about. I don't even have much of a platform, as I'm pretty sure
most of my site's traffic comes from bots.

The simple answer is: sometimes you just need to write. And that's all the
reason I need.

[aynrand]: http://www.newyorker.com/humor/daily-shouts/i-was-ayn-rands-lover
[lament]: https://www.maa.org/external_archive/devlin/LockhartsLament.pdf
[dfw]: https://www.dalkeyarchive.com/a-conversation-with-david-foster-wallace-by-larry-mccaffery/
